John Neulinger
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(No references, sources, or list of publications)

John Neulinger (April 26, 1924 - June 20, 1991) was a noted German-American psychologist and Professor Emeritus of psychology at City College of New York. Neulinger is best known for contributing a social psychological theory of leisure to the field of leisure studies.  Neulinger's theory of leisure is defined by a psychological state of mind that requires two criteria for leisure: perceived freedom and intrinsic motivation. In Neulinger's theory, individuals can be said to be in a state of leisure if they simply perceive that they have the freedom to choose activities and are motivated by an activity for its own sake, not just for its consequences. Neulinger first popularized his ideas in the 1974 book, The Psychology of Leisure.

Neulinger was born in Dresden, Germany to Rudolf and Julie Neulinger née Konirsch. At least two siblings are known, a brother named Kurt and a sister, Liselotte. Neulinger attended the Staatsoberrealgymnasium in Decín, Czechoslovakia as a child, but was taken to a Nazi concentration camp during World War II. His experience in Nazi Germany influenced his psychological theories regarding the connection between freedom and leisure in the same way as psychologist Viktor Frankl.

Having survived the war, Neulinger moved to the United States and became a naturalized citizen. Neulinger attended Hunter College and graduated in 1960. He received his doctorate in psychology from New York University in 1965. Neulinger married Josephine Levitus on July 22, 1950, and later had one child, a son named Ronald. In 1970, the marriage ended in divorce, and he later married fellow psychologist Gabrielle Stutman.

From 1964-1965, Neulinger was a research associate for the Russell Sage Foundation in New York City. After 1967, he spent the rest of his life working at the City College of the City University of New York: first as an assistant professor from 1967-1971; an associate professor from 1972-1976; and finally as a professor of psychology from 1977-1986. Neulinger was a member of the International Sociological Association, the American Psychological Association, the Gerontological Society, and Phi Beta Kappa.  He helped found the Academy of Leisure Sciences and was president of the Academy from 1982-1983.  Neulinger was also Director of the Leisure Institute in his home town of Dolgeville, New York, and he helped found the Society for the Reduction of Human Labor and acted as its Chair.

Neulinger's leisure theory, sometimes referred to as the Neulinger paradigm, was first published in the 1974 book, The Psychology of Leisure. The theory is a continuum model of leisure, with the criterion a condition Neulinger calls perceived freedom. This perceived freedom is a state of mind where one freely chooses to perform an activity—any activity—because one "wants to do it".  If an individual is involved in an activity where there is only intrinsic reward and perceived freedom, that person is said to be engaged in leisure. However, if the activity involves only extrinsic reward and the absence of perceived freedom, an individual is said to be in a state of non-leisure. There are six stages from one extreme to the other: Pure leisure, leisure-work, leisure-job, pure work, work-job, and pure job.

Neulinger's theory of leisure shows that intrinsic motivation and perceived freedom can directly change the perception of leisure.  But, like other social psychological theories of leisure, Neulinger's theory has been criticized for its lack of "discriminant power". The criterion of perceived freedom is not exclusive to leisure activities, and the failure of the theory to account for the differences between real freedom and the illusion of freedom is often challenged. Nevertheless, Neulinger's theory has exerted considerable influence on social psychology and leisure, and perceived freedom is still a popular concept in leisure studies.

Neulinger believed that human civilization could one day look forward to a society based on leisure, a leisure society where modern technology and science frees the average person from focusing on providing merely for subsistence needs and the worry associated with meeting those needs. Neulinger envisioned a world where the very concept of a "job" was no longer plausible, where work would be leisure-oriented. Unlike the past, Neulinger's vision was of a society where non-leisure activities form a minimum part of our day, where work would be carried out with meaning and without coercion, freely chosen, self-rewarding, and intrinsically motivating.  In his last publication before his death, Neulinger advocated for a societal transformation to that of a "universal leisure society instead of more centuries of useless destruction and worldwide conflicts".

Neulinger died at home of a heart attack at the age of 67 on June 20, 1991, in Dolgeville, New York.  Since his death, colleagues in the field of leisure studies have referred to Neulinger as a "leisure visionary".
